ADR 47: Support build-time security scans in integration service (#229)
konflux-ci/architecture: ADR/0047-movable-build-tests.md

> # 47. Attestable Build-Time Tests in Integration Service

Reviewer: 47 is taken by #218.

Date: 2025-04-06

## Status

Proposed

## Context

> Some of the security scans run during the build pipeline take a long time to
> run. This forces users to wait longer to be notified of the results of their
> builds.  In order to receive more immediate feedback, users have requested that
> they be able to run security scans during their integration tests.

Reviewer: While not necessarily incorrect, I feel like we can be more clear here.

```suggestion
Konflux makes it easy to run many security checks immediately after builds. While
the tests are shifted left (good), the checks are serialized to run immediately after the
builds which increase the feedback time (bad). Konflux has the ability to trigger additional
PipelineRuns immediately after the completion of artifact builds via IntegrationTestScenarios.

This architecture additionally improves the user experience as it allows these checks to be rerun
without having to rebuild the artifacts themselves, further decreasing feedback time upon failed
post-build TaskRuns.
```

Reviewer 2: I think Ryan's original is more clear. It states the context that brings us to the decision, without yet stating the decision or its consequences.

Reviewer: I agree after re-reading. I don't like what I proposed anymore. :)

## Decision

> We will add support for adding attestations to images from their integration

Reviewer 3: One thing to keep in mind is that we need to ensure conforma will behave as expected when there are two (different) SLSA Provenance attestations attached to the same image. Conforma ought to handle this, but previous experiments have shown that it does not handle this gracefully. I believe one of the issues was that it wanted to find every required build task in each of the attestations.

Author: > We also need to ensure that the integration test attestation does not "overwrite" the build pipeline attestation by using the same tag

I'm confused as to how this might happen.  Can you give me an example? Also, do you mean the image tags (e.g. `latest`, `v1`, etc) or a tag specifically related to the attestations?

> We will add support for adding attestations to images from their integration
> pipelines.

Reviewer: Moving some of the content from earlier to the decision.

```suggestion
In order to get scan-related feedback immediately after builds complete, we will add
support for creating enforceable test results from Integration pipelines. By leveraging
IntegrationTestScenarios, Konflux users can separate their build tasks from their testing
tasks. The test pipelines can be rerun independently of the build pipelines but all pipelines
will have attestations generated for them to enable Conforma evaluations.
```

### Attestations

> It is already possible to generate attestations from an integration pipeline. Users can add `IMAGE_URL` and `IMAGE_DIGEST` result fields to the pipeline definition. When the pipeline runs and completes, Tekton Chains will sign an attestation and push it to the matching image/digest in Quay.  We will need to document this process.

Reviewer: I think that we need to address the fact that this attestation will be a [SLSA provenance predicate](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/predicates/provenance.md). This content isn't _necessarily_ provenance, but it hasn't _really_ been provenance all along. We will continue to use the provenance predicate as generated by Chains. If, in the future, Chains starts supporting additional predicates, we would plan to change.

We do not want tasks to generate their own attestations because we still want to allow policies to require certain tasks to run and for these tasks to come from trusted references. We therefore need to have the attestation generated for the entire PipelineRun.

This is still consistent with the pattern that we have been following as these results have always been in a SLSA provenance predicate.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to record at least some of the "why" since reuse of the predicate is likely to be seen as an anti-pattern.

Reviewer: After talking with the KGC today, we want to see the change reflected in the ADR. As we are trying to position Konflux in the community as an example of SLSA use and supply chain security, we should be more careful with how we use provenance. Generating provenance for an image that isn't produced in that PipelineRun is much less ideal than each task producing its own attestations and Chains generating provenance for those attestations. This approach is also consistent with our current trust model that leverages provenance as a critical step in the verification process.

Author: I've updated the ADR to reflect your comments, let me know if it looks good

### Serialization

The integration service will also add support for serialization of tests so
that the Conforma pipeline can run after any tests that generate attestations.

> The exact mechanism for this has yet to be determined.

Reviewer 2: In the time that passed since writing this, is the mechanism more clear now? Can we write anything about what it is yet? Or, still TBD?

Author: Yes, this will be updated when I push the current commit.
